Bugs are generally cause by one of a few things: typos / syntax errors, implementation errors (like trying to modify a data structure in a way that doesn’t work, integer overflow, etc), and logic errors. 

The most important thing when debugging is understanding the problem. If you don’t know what is going wrong, trying to find the source of the problem can be incredibly difficult, especially when the source of the bug is an error with the logic used to write the code. Start by comparing what did happen with what was supposed to happen, to try to find potential sources for the bug. If you aren’t sure what the source of the bug is, it can also be very helpful to explain the code and the problem out loud as a way to make you make you think more about the code and the bug, and potentially help find any potential logic errors or forgotten edge cases.

A common and simple technique for debugging is the use of print or log statements in order to confirm the state of a variable or that a function / branch of a conditional statement is being entered when it should (and not entered when it shouldn’t). Putting these inside of an if statement can also be helpful when placing them inside of a loop or function that is called many times during execution.

If you know where the error occurred, such as if the program crashed at a specific statement, you can also try backtracking from the error point to look for potential sources of the error.

Another basic technique that can be useful sometimes is simplification of the code: commenting out lines to see when the bug stops occurring. How easy and effective this technique is to implement can vary a based on the structure and nature of the code. It’s also important in this case to remember to 

For larger programs where you are unsure of the location of the bug, using a divide-and-conquer approach can be helpful. You essentially search for the bug using a binary search technique, using a log or breakpoint roughly halfway through the code to see which half of the code contains the bug, then repeating that process with the section that contains the bug until you have a much more manageable amount of code to work with.

With debugging techniques, the important thing is to aid the programmer in accurately and effectively determining the nature and location of any errors in the code. Simply guessing and checking what the programmer assumes are the most likely sources of the bug can work, but it is not always clear what is causing a bug, and the source of a bug can sometimes be far removed in the code from the place where the programmer detected the bug. That is why a proper analysis of the code and its logic, as well as systematic methods of locating the sources of bugs, can save a lot of time and frustration while writing and debugging code. 