# DGL 104 Winter 2022 - Class Textbook
## Chapter 6
Welcome to chapter 6! This chapter is all about User Interface and Functional Requirements. A quick summary of this section, it's essentially how designers and developers work together and what tools they may use to do so. Below, you'll find our Table of Contents, and then we'll jump right into our chapter!

### TOC
- How to assess a user interface from a developer's perspective.
- Functional requirements and user stories

# How to Assess a User Interface from a Developer's Perspective
Quick note about this section, any hyperlinked text you see, will be summarized at the end. So don't feel like you need to interrupt your reading!
## What are Some Tools/Strategies Designers and Developers can Use to Work Better Together? 

### Introduction
But first, why is this even important? Aren’t they different jobs? Why would they care about working so closely together so well? And while true, they are different jobs, they’re both working towards the same end goal, being building an app, website, service etc. Think of it like building a house, why would a plumber care what the carpenters are doing? Well, they need to know so that they know where to put the pipes, and how the house is going to look. Same thing with digital development, designers and developers need to understand each other’s work so that they’re both working towards the same goal.

### Design Systems
As mentioned in the previous section, design systems are one way designers and developers can work together on a project. As [Kathryn Grayson Nanz](https://www.telerik.com/blogs/design-systems-developers) writes in her post “Design Systems for Developers”, a design system is essentially a library of how the product should look in the end. Using this system, designers can outline how the product should look, saving the team’s time by eliminating the time each developer may take to think about how buttons, text, layout, images etc., should look. A more subtle advantage to using a system like this is comfort for your developers(they may not feel comfortable making those design decisions on their own!). To summarize, a design system provides a complete outline of how almost every aspect of the product should look, streamlining the development process. For additional information, [DesignCourse](https://youtu.be/wc5krC28ynQ) has an excellent video about design systems on their YouTube!

### Team Oriented Thinking
In addition to design systems, there are many general ideas or concepts that designers can use do better work with their developers. These ideas below come from Adobe, being written by designer [Fabricio Teixeira](https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/perspectives/leadership-insights/principles-designer-developer-collaboration/). One of the first points he makes in his post, is to design with the idea that the developer is your user. Sounds odd at first, we know, but if you think about it, end users aren’t going to be the first one to see your designs, the development team is. Another point he makes is to understand that each development team is different, and you’re never really “done” with your designs, there’s likely to be some back and forth between the teams. The next points cover the ideas of Minimum Viable Products (MVPs) and team passion. Instead of feeling frustration whenever the project manager cuts feature from the product, designers can use that “extra” time to focus on making good documentation for the features, and spending time communicating with developers to ensure that their vision gets across. You may think, why would it be on the designers to encourage the developers, who cares? And the simple answer is, it’s much easier to work on a project if you’re passionate about it, and designers are much more likely to talk to clients than developers are. So, sharing client responses or passion can provide essential inspiration, remember, digital development is a team sport! For more ideas about how to go about these ideas, [James Cartwright](https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/perspectives/leadership-insights/fostering-designer-developer-collaboration/) (also from Adobe) wrote a similar article titled, “What Does it Actually Take for Designers and Engineers to Work Together in Perfect Harmony?”

### Promoting Communication
[Sean LeSeur](https://slickplan.com/blog/designers-developers-working-together) also covers tips and ideas outlining how developers and designers can work together in their post for Slickplan. Instead of writing from the designer side as Fabricio has, Sean instead looks at it from a sort of outside view, looking at ways to get designer and developer to work and talk together. One of the first points covered is simply setting expectations. Neither “side” (we say in quotations because it’s a team, not an us vs them) of the development team can work effectively if they aren’t working towards the same goal. Additionally, communication is key, and that can mean anything from setting clear communication channels, to giving good constructive feedback on both development aspects as well as design. Especially nowadays, looking into software such as Slack or Zoom can ease production. You may ask how? Well, as Sean outlines in his post, Slack or Zoom can provide a central area for all discussions, and using Zoom can let users share their screen, instead of writing things in text and hoping the other side understands. To view more information what tools the team can use, you may want to take a look at [Jonathan Saring’s](https://blog.bitsrc.io/15-designer-and-developer-collaboration-tools-for-2021-8fae54ac2298) article titled, “17 Designer Developer Collaboration and Handoff Tools For 2021”, written for Bits and Pieces.

### Summary
To provide a sort of summary for this post, designers and developers are becoming more intertwined as the idea of any “rockstar” members (as Fabricio Teixeira puts it) starts disappearing. It’s important for the design team to assist the development team so that the final product looks and works well. This doesn’t necessarily mean that designers suddenly become developers, instead meaning that they just work together, and provide each other with support. Team members can support each other in many ways as well. The major one being a design system providing the entire team with a sense of direction and easing development struggles. A common theme with all materials we’ve read is that remember that digital development is a team sport. Sounds obvious we know, but it really means that designers should work with developers and developers should work with designers, instead of simply saying “that’s not my area.” Next, we’ll provide a summary of all the links and tools we’ve mentioned in this section.

### Links and Tools
Now, to provide a summary of what tools are useful for such a thing. Below we’ll provide some links to additional resources, including the links provided above with a sentence or two summarizing the idea/tool.

- [Slack](https://slack.com/). You’ve likely heard the name and already know what it is, if you haven’t, it’s a great communication tool that allows for quick messages to your team, or private messages to specific team members. Not quite as long or formal as an email (though they certainly could be if you wanted!) but again, often much faster especially in terms of back and forth. Also includes the ability to record video and audio clips if you have the premium version. Think of it like a more professional/business themed [Discord server](https://discord.com/).
- [Zoom](https://zoom.us/). Again, you’ve probably already heard of this, it’s a video conference software. Allowing teams to work more remotely, instead of all commuting to a single office space.
- [Microsoft Teams](https://www.microsoft.com/microsoft-teams/group-chat-software). Similar to the two above, it’s a sort of all in one tool for text chats, voice calls or video calls. Free to use, as long as you keep the meetings to an hour or less, then it’s roughly $4-5 (USD-CAD) per month per user.
- [Kathryn Grayson Nanz’s](https://www.telerik.com/blogs/design-systems-developers) post for Progress Telerik “Design Systems for Developers.” Outlines what a design system is, and why they are useful to design and development teams.
- [Fabricio Teixeira’s](https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/perspectives/leadership-insights/principles-designer-developer-collaboration/) post for Adobe, “5 principles for Better Designer-Developer Collaboration.” This post, as the name suggests, is 5 relatively simple ways to improve collaboration between team members.
- [James Cartwright’s](https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/perspectives/leadership-insights/fostering-designer-developer-collaboration/) post also for Adobe, “What Does it Actually Take for Designers and Engineers to Work Together in Perfect Harmony?” Again, as the title suggests, this post is about how designers and developers (engineers) can better work together. The post also further proposes the idea that it’s not an “us vs them” working enviornment.
- [Sean LeSeur’s](https://slickplan.com/blog/designers-developers-working-together) post for Slickplan, “Designers and Developers Working Together (7 Collaboration Tips).” Another post outlining how to set clearer expectations, and how to go about promoting open communication between designers and developers.
- [DesignCourse’s](https://youtu.be/wc5krC28ynQ) YouTube video, “What is a Design System? Design Systems 101 for Designers.” Gary Simon (the host) explains what a design system is, and also provides some examples, including taking a look at Google’s design system, [Material.io](https://material.io/)
- [Jonathan Saring’s](https://blog.bitsrc.io/15-designer-and-developer-collaboration-tools-for-2021-8fae54ac2298) post for Bits and Pieces, “17 Designer Developer Collaboration and Handoff Tools For 2021.” This post goes over many different tools (too many to link here without it looking awful) that can be helpful when designing, or when handing a design off to a developer.
- [Rachel Andrew’s](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2018/04/working-together-designers-developers/) article for smashing magazine titled, “Working Together: How Designers And Developers Can Communicate To Create Better Projects.” This article goes over some tips and ideas on what they consider to be ideal conditions for team work. Including simple (yet important!) ideas such as having a feedback period between sides, so one side doesn’t just throw a file to the other and then move on to their next project.
- [MediaValet’s](https://www.mediavalet.com/blog/getting-designers-and-developers-working-together/) article titled, “How to Get Your Designers and Developers Working Together.” Again goes over the same base ideas that the others posts go over. However, this post outlines what each “side” of a designer-developer team does, as well as how they got about it. For example, they say the designer side uses tools such as the Adobe suite and Sketch to do their work, while the developer side will create the product using HTML, CSS and Java etc. It’s a short 5 minute read.
